# **[Linux Kernel](https://medium.com/dvt-engineering/how-to-write-your-first-linux-kernel-module-cf284408beeb)

The Linux Kernel is perhaps the most ubiquitous (and arguably still underappreciated) piece of software around today. It forms the basis of all Linux distributions (obviously), but that’s not all. It’s also running on lots of embedded hardware pretty much everywhere. Got a microwave? It’s probably running the Linux Kernel. Dishwasher? That too. Got enough money for a Tesla vehicle? Maybe you can fix a few bugs you find, and submit a patch to their Model S and Model X code on Github. Circuitry that keeps the International Space Station from crashing into the Earth in a fiery mass of death and destruction? Of course. The kernel is lightweight. Just means it plays nicely with low gravity.

The Linux kernel goes through a development cycle that is — quite frankly — insane. Some statistics from the Kernel 5.10 patch show that this release saw 252 new authors making commits into the repo (which is also the lowest amount of new contributors since 5.6), and new releases are coming out every 9 weeks. All in all, the kernel forms the solid bedrock of a large part of the computing world, but it’s not archaic by any means. All good and well, but what if you want to poke around inside it, and maybe write some code yourself? It can be a little daunting, as it’s an area of programming that most schools and boot camps don’t touch on. Plus, unlike with every flavour-of-the-month JavaScript framework that comes crawling out of the woodwork whenever you blink your eyes, you can’t go onto StackOverflow and find an odd billion or so posts to guide you through any issues.
