https://www.openssl.org/docs/manmaster/man5/x509v3_config.html
Certificate Policies
This is a raw extension that supports all of the defined fields of the certificate extension.

Policies without qualifiers are specified by giving the OID. Multiple policies are comma-separated. For example:

certificatePolicies = 1.2.4.5, 1.1.3.4
To include policy qualifiers, use the "@section" syntax to point to a section that specifies all the information.

The section referred to must include the policy OID using the name policyIdentifier. cPSuri qualifiers can be included using the syntax:

CPS.nnn = value
where nnn is a number.

userNotice qualifiers can be set using the syntax:

userNotice.nnn = @notice
The value of the userNotice qualifier is specified in the relevant section. This section can include explicitText, organization, and noticeNumbers options. explicitText and organization are text strings, noticeNumbers is a comma separated list of numbers. The organization and noticeNumbers options (if included) must BOTH be present. Some software might require the ia5org option at the top level; this changes the encoding from Displaytext to IA5String.

Example:

[extensions]
certificatePolicies = ia5org, 1.2.3.4, 1.5.6.7.8, @polsect

[polsect]
policyIdentifier = 1.3.5.8
CPS.1 = "http://my.host.example.com/"
CPS.2 = "http://my.your.example.com/"
userNotice.1 = @notice

[notice]
explicitText = "Explicit Text Here"
organization = "Organisation Name"
noticeNumbers = 1, 2, 3, 4
The character encoding of explicitText can be specified by prefixing the value with UTF8, BMP, or VISIBLE followed by colon. For example:

[notice]
explicitText = "UTF8:Explicit Text Here"
Policy Constraints
This is a multi-valued extension which consisting of the names requireExplicitPolicy or inhibitPolicyMapping and a non negative integer value. At least one component must be present.

Example:

policyConstraints = requireExplicitPolicy:3
Inhibit Any Policy
This is a string extension whose value must be a non negative integer.

Example:

inhibitAnyPolicy = 2
Name Constraints
This is a multi-valued extension. The name should begin with the word permitted or excluded followed by a ;. The rest of the name and the value follows the syntax of subjectAltName except email:copy is not supported and the IP form should consist of an IP addresses and subnet mask separated by a /.

Examples:

nameConstraints = permitted;IP:192.168.0.0/255.255.0.0

nameConstraints = permitted;email:.example.com

nameConstraints = excluded;email:.com

keyUsage
Authority Info Access.
The authority information access extension gives details about how to access certain information relating to the CA. Its syntax is accessOID;location where location has the same syntax as subject alternative name (except that email:copy is not supported). accessOID can be any valid OID but only certain values are meaningful, for example OCSP and caIssuers.

Example:

 authorityInfoAccess = OCSP;URI:http://ocsp.my.host/
 authorityInfoAccess = caIssuers;URI:http://my.ca/ca.html